Add VOF Van Keken benchmark section (#3425)
geodynamics/aspect: cookbooks/van-keken-vof/doc/van-keken-vof.tex

            \hline
        \end{tabular}
        \caption{\it Comparison of runtimes for the van Keken problem with VOF and a DG computational field, in which the initial conditions for DG smoothed are as described in section~\ref{paragraph:van-keken compositional fields} above.
            The times shown are for the full computation, ending at $t_{end} = 2000$ with a CFL
            number of $\sigma=0.5$ in both cases. 
            All of these computations were made with ASPECT version 2.2.0-pre (master, ef542ecc2) in release mode on the Peloton2 cluster at U.C.~Davis.
            We note that the change in the CFL number $\sigma$ and the differing
            choice of cluster makes a direct quantitative comparison between this
            table and table~\ref{tab:runtime-table} invalid due to too many
            confounding factors.
        }
        \label{tab:vof-runtime-comparison-table}
\end{table}

The consistency of the results shown here differs noticeably from the behavior of the  
problem with discontinuous initial conditions when computed with the FEM and DG advection 
algorithms.

> One of the possible reasons for the variation in behavior between the two
> approaches is the differing procedures for defining the initial interface.
> In particular we note that for the volume of fluid version of this benchmark
> problem we selected an initialization procedure specialized for the volume of
> fluid method which permits a much more consistent initialization by reducing the
> variation in the initial condition when the intial mesh is refined.

Author: ```suggestion
One possible reason for these differences is the specialized initialization procedure used for 
the volume of fluid method, which permits a much more consistent initialization by 
reducing the variation in the initial condition when the initial mesh is refined.
```

> 

Reviewer: Please rephrase the sentence above to the following:

```
One possible reason for these differences is the specialized initialization procedure used for 
the volume of fluid method, which permits a much more consistent initialization by 
reducing the variation in the initial condition when the initial mesh is refined.
```

of the Rayleigh-Taylor problem, which is unstable to perturbations of all 
wavelengths\footnote{This is true whether the two fluids have the same viscosity or different 
viscosities.} (e.g. see~\cite{SC:1961}).
Therefore, it is extremely sensitive to the initial conditions.
In order to address this sensitivity, we do not use  the default approach of
computing the initial material volume fractions using a composition quadrature.
Instead we compute the initial volume fractions using a signed distance
function $\phi$ as follows~\cite{JMR:2019,JMR-EGP:2019}.

First we create the function $\phi$, which has the following two properties: 1) it is positive 
in the region that contains one of the fluids, which we will refer to as fluid~1, and negative 
in the complement of this region, which we will refer to as fluid~2, and 2) at each point in 
the domain the magnitude $| \phi |$ of $\phi$ is the distance to the boundary between the 
two fluids or materials.
In the computations shown here, we use an approximation $\tilde{\phi}$ to $\phi$ such that   
difference between $\tilde{\phi}$ and $\phi$ is small enough for the purposes of making the 

> computations high-quality.

Author: ```suggestion
computations high-quality.
The use of an approximation as opposed to the function itself is due to obtaining an appropriate function for almost all nontrivial (not a line or a circle) boundaries is extremely difficult.
In this case, because the boundary is close to horizontal, we use the vertical distance to the boundary based on the argument that the gradient will not differ sufficiently from $1$ to induce errors in the initialization computation.
```
Attempted elaboration to clari

Reviewer 2: @class4kayaker The gradient is a vector, not a scalar.  I think that you meant 

> ... the gradient of $\phi$ will not differ sufficiently from $(1,0)$ so as to introduce large errors in the initialization computation.

One can also model the van Keken problem with the volume-of-fluid (VOF) interface tracking 

> algorithm in ASPECT.

Reviewer 3: Most readers will probably not know about the VoF method. It might be useful to add a few references here where one could look up what that term means.

    \caption{\it The results of two computations of the Van Keken problem made with the VOF 
        interface tracking algorithm overlaid upon each other at $t_{end}=2000$.
        This visualization shows the reconstructed boundary between the two
        materials at the final time $t_{end}$ as computed on a uniform grid
        with 7 and 8 levels of refinement.
        The boundaries between the materials are displayed as contours
        of the fields $\tilde{\psi}^7\,(t_{end})$ (black) and
        $\tilde{\psi}^8\,(t_{end})$ (bright green), which are generated by the  visualization postprocessor.
        The contours for the reconstructed material boundaries are superimposed
        on a color gradient visualization of the material composition for the
        computation with 8 levels of refinement in order to make the regions
        with each fluid type more evident.
        Compare with the fourth image on the right in Figure~\ref{fig:vk-1}.
    }
    \label{fig:VOF_van_Keken-02}
\end{figure}

Since, as noted above, when the interface is discontinuous, the van Keken problem is a version 

> of the Rayleigh-Taylor problem that is unstable to perturbations of all 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the Rayleigh-Taylor problem, which is unstable to perturbations of all 
```
I believe this is a case where the rules of grammar specify that one should use the word 'which' rather than 'that'.

The comma preceding the word 'which' is part of Cambridge University Press' "Guide for Authors".

Author: Fixed and commited.

wavelengths\footnote{This is true whether the two fluids have the same viscosity or different 

> viscosities.} (e.g. see~\cite{SC:1961}).

Author: Attempted fix made

> viscosities.} (e.g. see~\cite{SC:1961}).

Reviewer 2: Looks good to me. - I wrote the original version.  @bangerth You're right, the "Since" was a bit too much. :-)

> wavelengths,\footnote{This is true whether the two fluids have the same viscosity or different 
> viscosities.} (e.g. see~\cite{SC:1961}).
> Therefore, it is extremely sensitive to the initial conditions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
wavelengths\footnote{This is true whether the two fluids have the same viscosity or different 
viscosities.} (e.g. see~\cite{SC:1961}),
it is extremely sensitive to the initial conditions.
```

Reviewer 2: @gassmoeller @naliboff Making a separate PR for the AMR computation and figure is fine with me.  

However, I have another question.  I have spotted one or more minor errors in **manual.bib**.  For example, in this reference

> [72] J. Ritsema and H. J. van Heijst. Seismic imaging of structural heterogeneity in earth’s mantle: ...

Earth is not capitalized here, since there needs to be curly braces around the E: {E}arth in the **manual.bib** file.

Shall I suggest the change here?  One thing to consider is that once I am done with this PR I am not likely to look at the manual or **manual.bib** for quite a while.  I have a lot on my plate at the moment.

Reviewer 2: @gassmoeller Do you feel strongly about removing the complete sentence

> Therefore, it is extremely sensitive to the initial conditions.

and just adding

> ... it is extremely sensitive to the initial conditions.

to the end  of the previous sentence?  In other words, removing the word "Therefore, ..." as the beginning of the (complete) sentence quoted above.

I wrote those two sentences and I would prefer to remove the comma after **wavelengths** (it was definitely a mistake) but keep the period '.' after the right parentheses like this:

> (e.g. see~\cite{SC:1961}).

I think this is just a matter of writing style. :-)

Author: I have modified the text as suggested in @egpuckett's comment, and would appreciate a response on whether I should look into further modifications. I will note that to me the phrasing suggested by EGP is more natural, as it includes the transitioning structure. Some rephrasing might be appropriate, but just removing the word "Therefore" doesn't feel correct.

Reviewer 4: I am perfectly fine with your solution, I just wanted to fix the additional comma in some form.

In order to address this sensitivity, we do not use  the default approach of
computing the initial material volume fractions using a composition quadrature.
Instead we compute the initial volume fractions using a signed distance
function $\phi$ as follows~\cite{JMR:2019,JMR-EGP:2019}.

First we create the function $\phi$, which has the following two properties: 1) it is positive 
in the region that contains one of the fluids, which we will refer to as fluid~1, and negative 
in the complement of this region, which we will refer to as fluid~2, and 2) at each point in 

> the domain the magnitude $| \phi |$ of $\phi$ is the distance to the boundary between the 

Author: By definition, a signed distance function (which is the term for the type of function we define here) requires that it be the actual distance. In practice, the use of the horizontal or vertical distance is often close enough when considering small perturbations, but this is a case of a sufficiently close approximation rather than them actually satisfying the requirements for a signed distance function.

> the domain the magnitude $| \phi |$ of $\phi$ is the distance to the boundary between the 

Reviewer 3: Yes, I think below you make that distinction. Feel free to do with my comment whatever seems right to you.

> the domain the magnitude $| \phi |$ of $\phi$ is the distance to the boundary between the 

Author: I added some text below for the purpose of trying to make the use clearer.

two fluids or materials.

> In the computations shown here, we use an approximation $\tilde{\phi}$ to $\phi$ such that   

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the computations shown here, we use an approximation $\tilde{\phi}$ to $\phi$ such that the
```

difference between $\tilde{\phi}$ and $\phi$ is small enough for the purposes of making the 
computations high-quality.
The primary advantage of choosing this particular initialization algorithm is that it allows us 
to more accurately reproduce the initial condition on a sub-grid scale than would otherwise be 
possible on the coarser grid on which we compute the time evolution of the interface. 

\vspace{06pt}

\lstinputlisting[language=prmfile]{cookbooks/van-keken-vof/doc/main.part.prm.out}

The relevant sections of the parameter file for this type of initialization of the VOF method 
appears immediately above.
In particular, the combination of \texttt{Number of initialization samples} with the 
\texttt{level set} initialization type indicates that our initialization will consist of 
dividing each grid cell into $16 \times 16$ subcells and the distance to the given initial 

> interface $f(x)$, provided in \texttt{Function expression}, is computed in each of the 256 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
interface $f(\mathbf x)$, provided in \texttt{Function expression}, is computed in each of the 256 
```

subcells.

> We then use this information to compute a piecewise linear interface approximation to $f(x)$.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We then use this information to compute a piecewise linear interface approximation to $f(\mathbf x)$.
```

The volume fraction in each subcell is then found in the manner described 
in~\cite{JMR:2019,JMR-EGP:2019}.
This initialization procedure provides a much finer and thus, more accurate, initial condition 
than the standard VOF initialization procedure described above.

While the visualization configuration in a typical parameter file is sufficient for most 
purposes, when using the VOF method one has the ability to see the division between the fluids 
reconstructed by the VOF algorithm in each cell.
This is accomplished by plotting the zero contour of a field $\tilde\psi$ that
is generated to be $0$ on the reconstructed interface, positive in the region
with fluid~1, and negative in the region with fluid~2.
However $\tilde{\psi}$ does not satisfy the requirement that the magnitude is
equal to the distance to the interface as would be required for the signed

> distance function $\tilde{\phi}$.

Reviewer 3: did you mean
```suggestion
distance function $\phi$.
```
?

The modifications to the parameter file that are necessary in order to draw the reconstructed 
boundary as a contour are shown immediately below.
The full configuration file for this version of the benchmark problem can be found at 

> \url{cookbooks/van-keken-vof.prm}.

Reviewer 3: I think you're missing a directory name under `cookbooks/` here

Author: ```suggestion
\url{cookbooks/van-keken-vof/van-keken-vof.prm}.
```
Comment addeded to ease use of github suggestion batch.

\lstinputlisting[language=prmfile]{cookbooks/van-keken-vof/doc/postprocess.part.prm.out}
\noindent

We made a number of computations of the van Keken problem with the VOF method in order to 
compare the wall clock times with computations using a DG compositional field.
We ran both on the same cluster at global refinements 5--8 using one node with four CPUs and 

> 9--10 using two nodes with 16 CPUs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
refinements 9 and 10 using two nodes with 16 CPUs.
```

required computation time in all cases, frequently requiring less than half the
time required by the DG compositional field.

We now examine the RMS velocity data shown in Figure~\ref{fig:vof-vk-1}.
Other than for the case of 5 levels of uniform global refinement, the curves for the RMS 
velocities for $6$, $7$, $8$, $9$ and $10$ levels of refinement in Figure~\ref{fig:vof-vk-1} 
are nearly indistinguishable.

Upon examining the solution at the final time, we note that the general structure of the 
solution shown in Figure~\ref{fig:VOF_van_Keken-02} matches the form and the general structure 
found in other versions of this benchmark such as the fourth image on the right in 
Figure~\ref{fig:vk-1}.
We also note that the differences in the shape of the interface based on a single refinement 
as shown in Figure~\ref{fig:VOF_van_Keken-02} are minor, although still slightly visible.
This is to be expected as refinement is a perturbation of the initial condition at a smaller 
wave length.

\begin{table}
  \centering
   \begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|c|}
     \hline
      Global Refinement & Number of Processors & VOF & DG \\
      \hline

> \phantom{1}5 & \phantom{1}4 &\phantom{6}1.33 minutes\phantom{hours} &\phantom{1}2.57 minutes  \\

Reviewer 3: You won't need the `\phantom` part in the first two columns if you simply make them right-aligned in the `{|c|c|c|c|}` description above -- but you can also just leave it as is given that it shows nicely in the current version

Reviewer 2: I'm in favor of leaving it as is.  (I wrote it. :-)

\phantom{1}6 & \phantom{1}4 &\phantom{1}8.51 minutes\phantom{hours} & 19.5\phantom{7} minutes \\
\phantom{1}7 & \phantom{1}4 &\phantom{1}1.15 hours\phantom{minutes} & \phantom{1}2.49 hours\phantom{tes} \\
\phantom{1}8 & \phantom{1}4 &\phantom{1}8.53 hours\phantom{minutes} & 19.6 hours\phantom{tes} \\
\phantom{1}9 & 16           &         16.30 hours\phantom{minutes}  & \phantom{1}2.72 days\phantom{tes} \\
          10 & 16           & \phantom{1}5.17 days\phantom{minutess}&>6.00 days\phantom{tess} \\
            \hline
        \end{tabular}
        \caption{\it Comparison of runtimes for the van Keken problem with VOF
            and a DG compositional field, in which the initial conditions for
            DG smoothed are as described in section~\ref{paragraph:van-keken
            compositional fields} above.  The times shown are for the full

>             computation, ending at $t_{end} = 2000$ with a CFL number of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            computation, ending at $t_\text{end} = 2000$ with a CFL number of
```

            $\sigma=0.5$ in both cases. 
            All of these computations were made with ASPECT version 2.2.0-pre

>             (master, ef542ecc2) in release mode on the Peloton2 cluster at

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            (master, commit \texttt{ef542ecc2}) in release mode on the Peloton2 cluster at
```

            U.C.~Davis.
            We note that the change in the CFL number $\sigma$ and the
            differing choice of cluster makes a direct quantitative comparison

>             between this table and table~\ref{tab:runtime-table} invalid due to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            between this table and Table~\ref{tab:runtime-table} invalid due to
```

            too many confounding factors.
        }
        \label{tab:vof-runtime-comparison-table}
\end{table}

The consistency of the results shown here differs noticeably from the behavior of the  
problem with discontinuous initial conditions when computed with the FEM and DG advection 
algorithms.
One possible reason for these differences is the specialized initialization procedure used for 
the volume of fluid method, which permits a much more consistent initialization by 
reducing the variation in the initial condition when the initial mesh is refined.

To study this feature of our algorithm and the sensitivity of the problem to
the precise initial condition, we vary the size of the initial interface
perturbation and examine the sensitivity of the final results to a small change
in the initial conditions.
Specifically, we vary the amplitude $a$ of the cosine function in the initial conditions, as 
shown below.

\lstinputlisting[language=prmfile]{cookbooks/van-keken-vof/doc/variation.part.prm.out}

\begin{figure}[htb]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.5\textwidth]{cookbooks/van-keken-vof/doc/init_diff_rms_vel_comparison.png}

>     \caption{\it Computations of the Van Keken problem made with the VOF

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    \caption{\it Computations of the van Keken problem made with the VOF
```

    \includegraphics[width=0.4\textwidth]{cookbooks/van-keken-vof/doc/vof_van_keken_refinement_comparison.png}
    \caption{\it The results of two computations of the Van Keken problem made with the VOF 
        interface tracking algorithm overlaid upon each other at $t_{end}=2000$.
        This visualization shows the reconstructed boundary between the two
        materials  at the final time $t_{end}$ as computed on a uniform grid
        with 7 and 8 levels of refinement.
        The boundaries between the materials are displayed as contours
        of the fields $\tilde{\psi}^7\,(t_{end})$ (black) and
        $\tilde{\psi}^8\,(t_{end})$ (bright green), which are generated by the  visualization postprocessor.
        The contours for the reconstructed material boundaries are superimposed
        on a color gradient visualization of the material composition for the
        computation with 8 levels of refinement in order to make the regions

>         with each fluid type more evident.

Author: Clarifying edit to description of material boundary visualization

Since, as noted above, when the interface is discontinuous, the van Keken problem is a version 
of the Rayleigh-Taylor problem that is unstable to perturbations of all 
wavelengths,\footnote{This is true whether the two fluids have the same viscosity or different 
viscosities.} (e.g. see~\cite{SC:1961}).
Therefore, it is extremely sensitive to the initial conditions.
In order to address this sensitivity, we do not use  the default approach of
computing the initial material volume fractions using a composition quadrature.
Instead we compute the initial volume fractions using a signed distance

> function $\phi$ as follows~\cite{JMR:2019,JMR-EGP:2019}.

Author: Clarifying edit, requesting approval from @naliboff

The consistency of the results shown here differs noticeably from the behavior of the  
problem with discontinuous initial conditions when computed with the FEM and DG advection 
algorithms.
One of the possible reasons for the variation in behavior between the two
approaches is the differing procedures for defining the initial interface.
In particular we note that for the volume of fluid version of this benchmark
problem we selected an initialization procedure specialized for the volume of
fluid method which permits a much more consistent initialization by reducing the
variation in the initial condition when the intial mesh is refined.

To study this feature of our algorithm and the sensitivity of the problem to
the precise initial condition, we vary the size of the initial interface
perturbation and examine the sensitivity of the final results to a small change

> in the initial conditions.

Author: Rewording/condensing, requesting comment from @naliboff.
